[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY:
Well, I don't know
how my producers constantly
come up with incredible guests,
but we have one now
with Laird Scranton.
Noted author, he's
got nine books out.
His latest is "Seeking
the Primordial."
And he's also a cosmologist,
but he calls himself
a comparative cosmologist.
Laird, welcome to the program.
And what does that mean?
>>LAIRD SCRANTON: Well,
I joke with people
that it doesn't mean that I
do people's hair and nails.
Comparative cosmology
is an attempt
to learn more about ancient
symbols and myths and rituals
by triangulating on how
different cultures understood
the same elements.
>>NOORY: How did you
get involved in that?
>>SCRANTON: Sort of by accident.
My wife put me on to a
book called "Unexplained"
by Jerome Clark.
It talked about a
little tribe in Mali
called the Dogon, a modern-day,
primitive African tribe
who knew some things about
astronomy they shouldn't know.
They don't have
access to telescopes.
And they knew that the
very bright star of Sirius
was actually two stars.
And they knew the correct
orbital period for the stars.
And they expressed it using
ancient Egyptian words.
>>NOORY: And we did not know
about the two star system
at Sirius for years later.
>>SCRANTON: No, actually we knew
about that before that time,
but the idea was that--
actually, Carl Sagan actually
suggested that perhaps
the Dogon had learned it
from astronomers who had learned
about it around 1918 or so.
But Sagan missed the fact
that the Dogon material was
expressed using ancient
Egyptian words that had gone out
of use around 750 BC and
that the ancient Egyptian
mythology-- you know, in
ancient Egyptian myths, Isis
is the goddess who
represents the star Sirius.
Well, the Egyptians say she
has a dark sister, Nephthys.
So when the Dogon say there's
a dark star associated
with Sirius, we can
see the Egyptians
knew the same material.
>>NOORY: And that was thousands
of years before that, right?
>>SCRANTON: Thousands and
thousands of years before.
>>NOORY: How did the
Egyptians know this?
>>SCRANTON: Well,
that's hard to say.
The Dogon priests
flatly say they knew it
because somebody
in ancient times,
who understood the science,
told them about it.
>>NOORY: And did they
say where they came from?
Did they point up?
>>SCRANTON: Sort of.
The Buddhists also
have a similar system.
And the Buddhists flatly
their most sacred symbols
came from a non-human source.
The Dogon are a
little more specific.
They say it came
from a source that
was originally nonmaterial.
And my book, "Seeking
the Primordial"
sets out a path by
which we can understand
how that might make sense.
That the there might have been
an intelligent consciousness
that was originally non
material that interacted
with humanity in ancient times,
the way the Buddhists say,
the way the Cabbalists say,
the way the Dogons say.
>>NOORY: Now, that's
an interesting take,
an intelligent consciousness.
Does that tell you that maybe
there weren't visitations,
maybe we were physically
told about this
by extraterrestrials, but that
this consciousness that we
have tapped into somehow
fed us the information?
>>SCRANTON: Yes and no.
If you remember books
in the Old Testament
where Moses is on the mountain
receiving information from God,
interacting with
the burning bush--
>>NOORY: The 10 commandments.
>>SCRANTON: Right.
OK.
The Israelites are cautioned
not to approach too close
to the mountain, because of
the bad effects that might
accrue to them if they do.
>>NOORY: Sounds like
radiation to me.
>>SCRANTON: Right.
So there's clearly a
physical element here.
The Dogon view of things
is similar to that.
Their teachers were concerned
about potential bad effects
on us by being around them,
from being around them.
And so their
solution to that was
to sequester eight tribespeople
in a remote location,
teach those eight people
and send them back to teach
everybody else in the tribe.
And that's a paradigm
you see everywhere.
You see it play out in ancient
China and in the Americas.
You see it in Polynesia.
You see it all over
the world, really.
>>NOORY: Laird, it's safe to
say that something dramatic
happened a long time ago with
these ancient civilizations,
right?
>>SCRANTON: It
looks like there is.
I mean beginning with this
Sirius star system knowledge
the Dogon had, if you
pursue it a little further
and get down into the
anthropological material that
documents the Dogon
religion, the Dogon priests
are saying that their symbols
describe how matter forms.
And my first book was actually
a side-by-side comparison
of what the Dogon
say with what people
like Stephen Hawking
and Brian Greene
say about how matter forms.
And it's all the right
stuff, right descriptions
and the right drawings.
You could almost insert
the Dogon paragraph
into Stephen Hawking's
book and not change things.
>>NOORY: What would
the significance
be of the Dogon tribe of
knowing about the binary star
system in Sirius?
>>SCRANTON: Well,
if you trace it
all the way back to original
motives, the philosophies that
underlie the Dogon system say
that the intention for humanity
there are two goals.
One purpose is to help
humanity understand
its true place in relation
to the processes of creation,
believing that that would
affect how we choose to act.
The second thing is to
foster in us something called
discriminating knowledge,
which is basically the ability
to make inferences
from a set of facts.
Now, what was
interesting to me is
that even though the
science, from waves to Adam,
is correct that the
Dogon spell out,
there is a more fundamental
set of processes they describe.
You remember Albert
Einstein said
that for what we see as material
structures to have arisen
spontaneously, they
would have to rest
on very simple structures.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>SCRANTON: Even Stephen
Hawking who just recently passed
away, one of his final
articles said by the way,
the way things
happen at the bottom
of the structures of
matter is much simpler
than anybody thinks that it is.
As I was writing my book,
working from Dogon descriptions
and comparing to half a
dozen other different ancient
traditions, I was
confused because it
looked to me like the processes
of creation are very simple.
There are a handful of dynamics
that control what happens.
And they play out in the same
form all the way up the scale
from waves, or actually
from the quantum world,
all the way up to galaxies.
>>NOORY: As you
were doing your work
in your books, the latest
"Seeking the Primordial,"
what popped up for you
that you said, oh, my gosh,
I can't believe this?
>>SCRANTON: Well, the entry
point piece was I thought
to ask a question that I had--
in 20 years I hadn't thought
to ask, no researcher I
knew had thought to ask--
could sacred geometry be
the geometry of a thing?
Because there are a number
of scientific structures
that can be expressed
geometrically.
It turns out that sacred
geometry in its simplest form
is the geometry of what are
called half-spin particles.
This is a kind of
particle of matter
whose symmetry requires it
to be turned around twice
in order to look the same.
Now--
>>NOORY: Is that unusual?
>>SCRANTON: Yes.
We should imagine that there
shouldn't be any object that we
can think of that had to be
turned around more than once
to look the way it
originally looked.
Well, these particles have
to be turned around twice
before they take--
they look the way
they originally
looked when you started out.
That shouldn't happen.
Doesn't make sense
that that happens.
>>NOORY: But it does.
>>SCRANTON: So this is
the kind of particle
that potentially passes
into a blind spot for us
and back out of that
blind spot again.
It's the kind of particle
that has the potential
to point to a nonmaterial
realm that we don't see.
>>NOORY: Laird, physicist
Michio Kaku, of course,
has talked about a lot
of things, including
his thoughts on string theory.
>>MICHIO KAKU: And
what else could we do?
We can also unlock the
secrets of the Big Bang.
You see, Einstein's
equations break down
at the instant of the Big Bang
and the center of a black hole.
The two most interesting
places in the universe
are beyond our reach using
Einstein's equations.
We need a higher theory.
And that's where
string theory comes in.
String theory takes you
before the Big Bang,
before genesis itself.
And what does string theory say?
It says that there is a
multiverse of universes.
Where did the Big
Bang come from?
Well, Einstein's equations
give us this compelling picture
that we are like insects on a
soap bubble, a gigantic soap
bubble which is expanding.
And we are trapped
like flies on flypaper.
We can't escape the soap bubble.
And that's called
the Big Bang Theory.
String theory says there should
be other bubbles out there.
In a multiverse of bubbles,
when two universes collide,
it can form another universe.
When a universe splits in half,
it can create two universes.
And that, we think,
is the Big Bang.
The Big Bang is caused either
by the collision of universes
or by the fissioning
of universes.
>>NOORY: Interesting
thoughts, Laird, interesting.
What do you think of that?
>>SCRANTON: All
of that is largely
in keeping with
what the Dogon say,
although spun
slightly differently.
From the Dogon perspective,
the Dogon cosmology
rests on a very ancient
philosophy called Samkhya.
And Samkhya is the basis of all
the Indian traditions in India.
The Vedic tradition, the Hindu
and the Buddhist traditions
are traditionally understood
to rest on Samkhya.
And Samkhya says that universes
form in pairs routinely
and that ours is the fourth
of seven pairs of universes
that the Dogon talk
about or know about.
Now one of those is a
nonmaterial universe.
And the other one is
a material universe.
And there's a cycle
of energy that
scrolls from one to the other
that is as essential to life
in the universe as
the natural water
cycle is to life on the planet.
Now the natural water
cycle is water evaporating
from bodies of water to form
clouds that then rise up
over the mountains
and rain-- like it
is right now today in Boulder.
And that water flows back
to the sea through streams.
Without that cycle of water,
there wouldn't be any life.
Well, the Dogon
say that there is
a cycle of energy
between universes
that does the same thing.
But as it turns out, it's not
just energy that's growing,
it's also mass.
And Einstein says that when
you make a thing more massive,
you slow down its time frame.
Imagine, you're driving
your car next to a train.
And the train is going a
little faster than you are
and you want to
catch up with it.
Well, in a car, if you
step on the gas pedal,
you can catch up with
the train and move
right along side of it.
But if we're talking about
things like the speed of light,
you can't do that.
When you step on
the gas, not only
are you increasing
your acceleration,
at the same time you're slowing
down how fast time runs.
And so the train always stays
the same speed ahead of you
that it was.
So when you scroll energy from
one universe to the other,
you're changing the time
frames of these universes.
One is becoming a
slower time frame,
the other one is becoming a
very much quicker time frame.
The idea is that at
the middle of a cycle--
if you think of this cycle
of scrolling energy as being
a year, or the great year--
say the way the Indians refer--
the people in
India refer to it--
then the point at
which the time frame
is equalized between
the universes
would be the equinox,
the point at which
many of the ancient
holidays were celebrated.
Now, the Egyptians referred
to the equinox as kheper.
And kheper is the dung beetle
who represents nonexistence
coming into existence.
And in Judaism, at
the equinox, they
had a holiday called
Yom Kippur, Yom Kippur.
At the other equinox, Judaism
has a holiday called Passover.
And a Passover Seder
ends with the opening
of a door to allow a
nonmaterial entity to walk in.
They are almost
physically enacting
what I say can happen
between these two universes.
That when the time
frames equalize,
it's like equalizing
pressure in an airlock,
and it becomes theoretically
possible for something
on the nonmaterial
side or less material
side to move over into
the material side.
>>NOORY: Do you think
ancient civilizations
were aware of the
possibility of multiverses?
>>SCRANTON: I think
that they absolutely
were, because they
were specifically
taught about it according to
the Buddhists and the Dogon.
And this was information that--
even though we don't see
signs of electron microscopes
and things like that
in ancient times--
this is information that
should be recognized
by a technological culture.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>SCRANTON: So the target
was way out in the future.
This is the future
target of information.
And the purpose of the
intervening generations
was to try to keep it
intact to pass down
to a generation that would
understand the references.
You come to our generation.
And it's all scientific.
These are scientific diagrams.
Even the Buddhists say so.
Their most essential symbols are
shapes that adhere in nature,
but you can only see them
with very powerful equipment.
>>NOORY: Isn't it amazing
what kind of knowledge
they possessed?
Truly remarkable, isn't it?
>>SCRANTON: It is.
Now, if you want to get really
down into the motivation
of why, why would
anybody think to do this?
Why would somebody
want to set up
this kind of a
structure for humanity
to retain this information?
>>NOORY: Right.
>>SCRANTON: Well, as
time frames quicken
on the nonmaterial
side, you end up
at the extreme point
when it's quickest,
you end up at a point where
all events essentially
happen at once.
And there's no moment
in which to take action.
And yet, you have a
full consciousness
that understands everything,
but has no ability to act,
because there's no
time, no moment of time
in which to take action.
If that were a person,
there's a syndrome
called locked-in syndrome.
You may be familiar with
a book called "The Diving
Bell and the Butterfly."
It was written by a man who
was perfectly conscious.
They thought he was brain dead,
but he was actually locked-in.
He was a Frenchman.
He could only blink
his eyes, that's
the only movement he could make.
>>NOORY: But he was aware.
>>SCRANTON: Perfectly aware.
And he managed to make an
attendant aware of the fact
that he was still in there.
And he blinked.
She established a system
of blink where he--
>>NOORY: Like Morse Code almost.
>>SCRANTON: One
letter at the time,
he wrote an entire
book to express--
>>NOORY: Aak.
>>SCRANTON: --what it
was like to be locked in.
>>NOORY: When he was
trapped in this body.
>>SCRANTON: Right.
So now a third of the way
into this scrolling energy
cycle, the less material
side figures out
that where it's going to
end up is with it locked in,
with no moment-- as
essentially an entangled
state, where there's no
moment to take an action.
And that's a horrific state.
That's like being buried alive,
unless you have some compatriot
who knows you are there.
And so their purpose was
to establish a structure
for a society that would
preserve our memory of the fact
that they're there at the
point where they're locked in.
Now if you think of a
Yuga cycle in Buddhism,
the point where one side of
the cycle is fully ascended,
the other side is
fully descended,
furthest removed
from any knowledge
that the nonmaterial
even exists.
>>NOORY: Laird, some
societies think that we're
in a holographic universe.
What does that mean?
>>SCRANTON: The
Dogon also say that.
The way that our
perceptions work
is a lot like the way Wi-FI
works, or like broadcast TV
originally worked.
That reality exists
in the form of waves,
primarily because it exists
in an ultra quick time frame.
It doesn't really exist here.
The seeds of everything of
exist on the nonmaterial side.
That's sort of like the
nonmaterials of watching a TV
show, that our reality
only becomes real to us
the same way that a wave--
a broadcast television wave--
gets translated into an image
if you turn your TV set on.
If you don't turn the TV set on,
it remains as a wave that you
never--
>>NOORY: You don't pick it up.
>>SCRANTON: Right.
>>SCRANTON: And
so you have no way
of detecting that it
exists as waves as opposed
to the coherent
image on your TV.
>>NOORY: And let's
look at the possibility
that our universe is a hologram.
>>MICHAEL MOYER: You and I,
and everything around us,
appear to exist in
three dimensions--
up and down, front and
back, left to right.
But appearances
can be deceptive.
Many physicists now believe
that reality is not, in fact,
three dimensional.
Instead, they think that the
fundamental core of reality
comes written in two
dimensional sheets
like this piece of paper.
In this view, our world is a
three dimensional projection
of information that's written
on a two dimensional surface,
an illusion much
like a hologram.
Clearly, this is insane.
What are these sheets?
Why would anyone
think that reality
is two dimensional
when everything we know
appears in three dimensions?
The answer lies in black holes.
Black holes famously suck
in everything around them
and never let go.
But what would
happen if you were
to throw something with a lot of
information into a black hole?
Something like a
book or a hard drive?
Physicists know that
information can never be lost,
only scrambled.
So the information in our
book can't disappear forever
into the black hole
never to be recovered.
It must still exist
somewhere accessible to us.
Physicists say it is written
on the so-called event
horizon of a black hole, the
two dimensional surface that
defines a point of no return.
Likewise, physicists have proven
that events occurring on a two
dimensional sheet
are interchangeable
with the description
in three dimensions.
Mathematically,
it's all the same.
Which leaves us to
wonder which is real,
the three dimensions we
observe or the two dimensional
description that
makes the math work?
>>NOORY: So I must have
missed that part in physics
in my day, Laird.
>>SCRANTON: Well, it's
simpler than the way
he's explaining it.
I agree with everything he said.
To understand it,
think about distance.
If it took me no time at all
to move from Boulder, Colorado,
to my home in Albany, New
York, then the distance
wouldn't matter.
If I could instantly be there.
>>NOORY: Instantly be there.
>>SCRANTON: Then it doesn't
matter what the distance is,
distance is a moot point.
Well, at the level of waves
that he's talking about,
the two dimensional
level he's talking about,
distance in space has no
meaning because time is so
running so quickly that
everything happens instantly.
Space doesn't matter.
Now, as you impart mass
to something, to a wave,
you slow its time frame.
And as you slow its
time frame, now it
takes you time to get
from here to there.
And now space has meaning.
It has importance, significance.
So it's not that
space doesn't exist,
it's that the
quickness of time frame
eliminates it as
part of the equation.
You've factored it out.
You don't have to
consider space anymore.
You can move immediately
from here to here.
>>NOORY: Can you learn
how to time travel
if you learn the basics of this?
>>SCRANTON: The implication
is that somebody who is
on the nonmaterial side might
have an ability to do that that
we don't.
The way I compare it
is we experience time
like a cassette
tape if we didn't
have a fast forward button.
If we want to listen to a song
3/4 of the way into the tape,
our only choice is to
listen to the whole tape
till we get to the song.
>>NOORY: The whole thing.
Right.
>>SCRANTON: On the
nonmaterial side,
time functions more like a CD.
If you want to move to a
particular track, you can.
Now, time in ancient
Egypt, the way
it was described, daytime
hours were measured,
essentially, by a
sundial, which measures
the motions of a shadow
measuring out seconds
and minutes and so forth.
At night, it was measured
by the progressive rising
of constellations.
Each constellation represented
the next hour of the night.
And they had 12 constellations
they tracked during the night.
There's a fundamental
difference in the way
the time is looked at.
The nighttime
measurement of time
compares to how
time is experienced
on the nonmaterial side.
The sundial compares to
how time's experienced
on the material side.
Now there is another theory
of matter called the Aether
physics model.
>>NOORY: What's that mean?
>>SCRANTON: This is a
model, like string theory,
that was developed by a graduate
student in astrophysics named
David W. Thompson III who wasn't
satisfied with the answers he
was getting from his professors
about fundamental questions
like where did dimensions
come from and what--
>>NOORY: I don't blame him.
>>SCRANTON: What does time--
right.
Because we get down to
these fundamental questions
and he felt he was basically
getting phony baloney answers--
>>NOORY: The run around.
>>SCRANTON: Right.
To these things.
So he developed this
model of physics,
redeveloping all the
definitions from the ground up.
Rather than defining everything
in terms of large structures,
he defined everything
in terms of the smallest
measurable structure.
And what we evolved
was a system that
begins with the same fundamental
symbolic shapes and concepts
that the Dogon have.
And so they're a perfect match
for what the Dogon are saying
is going on.
And from his perspective,
time, as a generic thing,
is in oscillation,
actually everything is.
Do you know what a dipole is?
This is the fundamental
dynamic of magnetism.
It's the idea of energies
that oscillate out and then in
and then out and then in
and then out and then in.
That's one of the fundamental
dynamics of the universe that's
everything is based on.
Galaxy groups are dipoles.
Gravity functions like a dipole.
>>NOORY: And without gravity,
we have nothing, do we?
>>SCRANTON: Now, gravity
itself, as it turns out,
the physicists are looking for
a particle to convey gravity.
But if you follow
what the Dogons say,
you come to understand
gravity as being
like buoyancy in water.
In water, if you
have a buoyant object
and you take it to a
bottom of a swimming pool
where the pressure
is very strong--
the deeper you go in water,
the greater the pressure gets--
that buoyant object gravitates
toward the least amount
of pressure.
>>NOORY: Fast.
>>SCRANTON: In
the universe, mass
causes time frame to slow down.
And things that are
affected by gravity
gravitate towards the
slowest time frame.
And so the larger a planet you
have, the more massive it is,
a massive star has a slower
time frame than a smaller.
What it means to us
is, first of all,
in terms of religion
that religion has
been conducted on two levels--
a public level and a private
level, esoteric and exoteric,
exoteric and esoteric.
In the exoteric
religions, they tell us
that the processes of creation
are fundamentally unknowable,
that we can't know them
no matter how hard we try.
>>NOORY: Do you believe that?
>>SCRANTON: I was
confused about that,
because as I was
researching this book
it looked to me more
and more as if they
were completely knowable.
There's a handful
of dynamics here
that are very straight forward
that we can easily understand.
>>NOORY: Answered
scientifically or religiously?
>>SCRANTON: Scientifically
and religiously.
Answer it scientifically and
then support it religiously.
You go to esoteric Buddhism,
and esoteric Buddhism
says, oh, by the way, one
of the things we fib about
is that these things
are unknowable.
They're actually
perfectly knowable.
The Dogon, you can see--
they have a tendency
also, they admit that they
fib about certain things.
They have a
celebration of Sirius.
The orbital period of the
Sirius stars is 50 years.
And they have a celebration
that occurs every 50
years of the Sirius stars.
>>NOORY: How did they know this?
>>SCRANTON: But to
disguise that calculation,
they say publicly that they
celebrate it every 60 years.
The anthropologists who studied
them said, that's not true.
At the end of 50 years, they
find a reason to make an excuse
and celebrate it
early this time.
>>NOORY: And why do they
even want to celebrate it?
So what?
>>SCRANTON: Because the dynamic
between these two Sirius
stars is another of the
fundamental dynamics
of the universe.
It's the same dynamic as what
we call virtual particles.
When two streams of
energy come together
that are of different qualities,
even of water, when they meet,
they tend to circle.
And they tend to spiral.
They create a vortex.
And when energy
spirals, it creates--
an when electromagnetism
spirals-- it creates mass.
So all that's going
on under the covers
is that you have two
qualities of energy.
One is magnetism.
One is electricity.
And when they come together,
they tend to spiral.
When they spiral,
they create mass.
And when they create mass,
that spiraling mass has
the equivalent of
the black holes
we were just looking
at in your clip.
Black holes and fundamental
particles work the same way.
If you were to look at,
say, an act of perception
of a wave that draws it
up and creates a particle,
if you were to look at that from
the perspective of the wave,
what I suspect you'd
see is exactly what
we see when we look
at a black hole.
It's the same dynamic.
The Dogon are saying because
these processes are parallel,
if you understand one of
the processes in some frame
you can see, you can
understand the ones
you can't see just by guessing
because you know it's parallel.
>>NOORY: How could
this tribe talk
in such incredible
language of science?
>>SCRANTON: They say because
the teachers they had,
the teachers that taught
them, understood it.
They didn't understand
it as theory.
They weren't talking like the
theorists are talking here,
we think such and such.
They were saying,
here's how it works.
We understand it.
Here's how it works.
Remember it.
Teach it to your kids.
Don't forget it.
And that's what these
ancient religions
did, to one extent or another.
The Dogon did it very well.
The Buddhists did it very well.
Some of the other traditions
didn't do it quite as well.
>>NOORY: And they lost it?
>>SCRANTON: Well, they lost it.
Or they played telephone with
it, so certain things changed.
The Dogon prioritize
preserving original forms,
original meanings of words,
original meanings of symbols.
So the Buddhists also in
their own way do that also.
So by comparing back and
forth between these cultures,
you can demonstrate that the
Dogon meaning hasn't changed,
because these other
cultures understand
it the same way they do.
>>NOORY: Is this the basis for
religion in a scientific way?
>>SCRANTON: This is the
original foundation upon which
modern religion came out of.
In the original form,
nothing was deified.
We were only talking
about stages and processes
of creation.
And then over time, because
of certain kinds of metaphors
they were using,
they found it easy--
if you're trying to explain
something to a future audience,
you have to frame it in a way
they're going to understand.
And so some of the metaphors are
in terms of the animal kingdom.
And some are in terms
of the plant kingdom.
And some are in terms of
elements-- water, fire, wind,
and earth, things like that.
In the original form, these
were scientific concepts.
Over time, they got
to be personified.
So by Egypt, you have
a cosmological concept
that in the form of a person
with an animal's head.
And animal symbolism
actually came first in India.
>>NOORY: What are Yuga cycles?
>>SCRANTON: OK.
Yuga-- oh, another nice
thing about this system
is that it's based on
phonetics that have meaning.
The phonetics are root concepts.
U is the concept of--
for the Dogon, it
represents the concept
of a seed that's
shaped like this.
This is the fundamental
shape, geometric shape,
of matter that causes
mass to be shaped.
Ga is a phonetic value
that refers to temporality,
time past, present, and future.
And so Yuga cycle is
the geometry of matter
that shapes time.
It's the shaping, the
swirling energy, and at
the same time shaping
the time frames.
>>NOORY: Our dear friend Gregg
Braden has his excuses, too,
here.
>>GREGG BRADEN:
Researchers have been
able to find is that
the Hindu cycles,
they were, in fact, talking
about massive lengths of time,
430,000 year cycles,
for example, and cycles
within cycles.
And they would relate
those cosmic cycles to us
through what are
called fractals.
So we are fractals of those
larger cycles of time.
It's interesting because,
from the Hindu perspective,
we entered into a 5,000 year
cycle about 3200 years BC.
And so in their way, they also
allow for the same 5,000 year
cycle that the
Mayans talk about.
So we have a lot of evidence.
Egypt, the Egyptian zodiac,
was the first circular zodiac
known to document
the 26,000 year
cycle of Earth's progression
through all the zodiac signs.
But one of the
interesting things
is that in the
original zodiac, there
were 13 zodiac signs, not 12.
And the 13th zodiac
sign was the sign
of wisdom, the
serpent, which has been
demonized in a lot of the West.
And the serpent of
wisdom is something
you find almost universally
through these ancient and
indigenous traditions where
the wisdom is honored.
And it was only in what we
would call modern times,
largely during the time after
the church, for example, when
we went to the 30-day, month
based on interest cycles that
were introduced during
that time by the church,
rather than the 28-day
cycles of nature that link us
to the lunar cycles, that are
reflected in the woman's body,
for example.
And they knew this.
So they understood the
precession of the equinoxes.
They understood our
relationship to the stars,
and to the cycles
that bring change
to the earth and
their relationship
to the stars in
ways that we only
confirmed in the 20th century.
>>NOORY: So is he saying, Laird?
What is saying?
>>SCRANTON: He's saying the
same thing that the patricians I
study say approximately--
that there's a 20, roughly
25,000, 26,000 year cycle,
of which we're concerned
about really the half cycles.
And during those half
cycles, one universe
is becoming less massive.
It's ascending,
according to the way
the Buddhists talk about it.
The other side is becoming
more massive or more material.
It's descending, according
to the Buddhists.
Now, the middle of that
12,000 year half cycle
is where the equinox
would have been
when it would have been possible
to crossover between one
universe to the other.
That falls around
3200 or 3400 BC.
That's about the time the
Hebrew calendar starts counting.
From the Cabbalist
point of view,
there is a 6,000
year period of time
there they're talking
about trying to reconcile.
And we're just now at the end
of that approximately 6,000 year
cycle.
The Hebrew year
right now is 5778,
I think, coming into 5779.
So it's approximately
6,000 years.
So the sources I work with
are seeing that we're just
now passing the
bottom of that cycle
and starting back up an
ascending cycle, theoretically,
things start getting
better for us.
>>NOORY: Soon, I hope.
>>SCRANTON: Though, as
John Lennon would say,
can't get no worse.
>>NOORY: When you wrote the book
"Seeking the "Primordial, what
was the main message you
wanted to give all of us?
>>SCRANTON: This
is material that
belongs to humanity the
same way a seed does.
If I find a seed on the sidewalk
and pick it up and plant it
in the ground and then
water it and care for it,
my expectation should be that
it will grow into a plant.
>>NOORY: You would hope.
>>SCRANTON: No one has the
right to own that seed.
If I find the seed,
it's my human right
to be able to plant
it and have it grow.
This material that
we're talking about
falls in that same
category for me.
This is material that
belongs to everyone.
To try to make it proprietary
goes against the nature
of the material itself.
This is fundamental
information that
tells us with very
great specificity
what our relationship is to that
larger processes of creation
and what our role in
the cycle happens to be.
We're-- essentially, the
esoteric tradition has been
trying to evoke a group of
sincere initiates who are
attuned to things that are
nonmaterial who can serve
as caretakers for the
nonmaterial side when
it's in its locked-in condition.
As the cycle continues
around and we start up
the ascending side, where we
become less and less material,
we are eventually
going to find ourselves
in that locked-in condition.
And we're going to need
the nonmaterial side
to be our caretakers.
The purpose of the book
"Seeking the Primordial"
is to set out what
that dynamic is.
What Judaism would
call it a covenant
is between the two universes.
That as siblings, each universe
takes care of the other
when it needs it.
And so each, in its
own way, is doing that
according to this cycle.
>>NOORY: Have we lost
knowledge from the past?
Because most people would
not understand this today.
>>SCRANTON: It's been
preserved substantially intact
in some traditions.
Many traditions have
lost the trail of it.
We have lost sight of
long-term goals, I would say.
If you set out on a road trip.
And you knew you were trying
to get from here to Florida.
And halfway through,
you lost your maps
and got hit on and forgot
where you were trying to go,
you could end up in New
England instead of Florida.
That's sort of where many of
the cultures we are living among
are.
They have forgotten where it
was they were trying to get to.
This book ties back
together half a dozen
different ancient perspectives
on where it was we
were trying to get to
in the first place.
>>NOORY: Is it trying
to tell us, Laird,
that there were
extraterrestrials,
other universes, that
there's a crossover?
What are they trying
to convince us of?
>>SCRANTON: Ultimately,
the final stage
of ascension in Buddhism
is understanding
that it's all one consciousness,
that individual consciousness
represents subdivisions
of a grand consciousness,
not deified, simply a
life form, in the same way
that a particle represents a
subdivision of a grand wavelike
source.
The processes of consciousness
that we experience
between the two
hemispheres of our brain,
it's the same dynamic as
the processes that occur
between these two universes.
If you understand
it on one level,
you understand it on
the next level up.
And at the top level, these
14 pairs of universes,
the seven pairs of universes,
are configured as a helix.
The suggestion is
that the structure,
a DNA-like structure, is
built right into the system
from the very start.
The potential for life is there
right from the very start.
Under the right
conditions, it's going
to take root wherever it can.
>>NOORY: Does it
tell us about God?
Is it leading us there?
>>SCRANTON: It
doesn't define God.
The Samkhya philosophy is
a non-theistic philosophy.
From its perspective,
it says all
we're dealing with at the
very start are two energies.
It doesn't try to address
where those energies came from.
But that everything
else that happens
is a direct and
quick consequence
of the dynamics of
these two energies.
And even the word deity refers,
in the original traditions,
refers only to structures in
this process that don't change.
It's essentially this
geometric overlap
between universes is the
structure that constantly
remains the same.
That's the thing that
represents deity.
The original word was
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH] and that
connects to the idea of
data, if you want to go back
to a projected universe
kind of concept.
This is the structure
that doesn't change.
They're not trying
to treat it as a god.
They're not trying to
treat it as a deity.
This is a scientific concept.
>>NOORY: Through this
process, Laird, what have you
learned personally
about all this
that you didn't know before?
>>SCRANTON: Well,
the first thing
a person in my field
of study learns
is that there are things going
on that we don't understand.
And the best way
for me to express
that is imagine you are learning
to drive a car and nobody
told you that there was
a blind spot created
by the mirrors in your car.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>SCRANTON: You
might theoretically
drive your entire career
without an accident
and never understand
that there's
a blind spot in those mirrors.
>>NOORY: Or, you get
into many accidents.
>>SCRANTON: Or you might, right.
Well, the universe
is the same way.
And sacred geometry points us
to the existence of a blind spot
that science doesn't see.
Science is only trying to
consider real the things
that it can directly measure.
But there are certain
aspects to this that are
less than perfectly measurable.
I, myself, when I understood
that the Dogon correctly
described waves to the
atom had to take that
as a credential that was
the rationale for believing
that the more fundamental
structure was going
to be a correct structure.
>>NOORY: Are you astounded by
what the Dogon tribe knows?
>>SCRANTON: I've been constantly
astounded all the way along
that I would even
stumble onto any of this.
>>NOORY: It's much
more than just
them knowing about
another star system.
>>SCRANTON: Right.
Much, much more.
That was one of the entry
points into the system.
The entry points
are all things that
would make the average person
scratch their head and say,
gee, I wonder why
anybody would do that.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>SCRANTON: Good
example is circumcision.
Circumcision is another entry
point, symbolic entry point,
into this system.
It's like a crop circle.
It's supposed to make some
percentage of the populace
scratch their head and
say, why in the world,
how could that possibly be?
Where it could have come from?
What could it
possibly represent?
And asking that question
leads you into the things
that I'm researching.
>>NOORY: Why the Dogon tribe?
Why them?
>>SCRANTON: They happen to be--
OK.
There was a round of
instruction at 10,000 BC
in the era of Gobekli Tepe.
>>NOORY: In Turkey.
>>SCRANTON: In Turkey, yes.
And it looks as
if the Dogon were
one of the groups
that did the best
job of preserving that over the
course of, maybe, 6,000 years.
And so in a second
round of instruction
that happened-- looks to me
it happened on Orkney island
in Scotland around
3,200 BC, it looks
as if the Dogon were
enlisted as teacher's aides
or as adjunct professors to
be the face of the education
and put distance between the
nonmaterial energies that
were dangerous and the students
who might be affected by them.
>>NOORY: Laird, I still have--
and I've had many physicists
on my radio show
"Coast to Coast,"
a difficult time trying to
comprehend the Big Bang.
I have not had one physicist--
even Michio Kaku's been
on the program--
who could clearly explain to
me what the heck happened.
Can you?
>>SCRANTON: The Dogon
say that what preceded
the Big Bang was essentially
two black holes that
were feeding mass
into a central space
and that the gravitational
influence of the black holes
held it in stasis in that space
between the two black holes.
And the matter started to spin
faster and faster and faster
and faster.
And eventually, it
grew large enough
and it was spinning fast
enough that it couldn't
be contained anymore by
the gravitational pull
of a black hole.
And that's what
created our universe.
That's their take on it.
>>NOORY: That's their take.
>>SCRANTON: Dynamically, what's
happening with the Big Bang is
the dipole dynamic of time
frames, of time frames,
getting quicker and quicker
and quicker and slower
and slower and slower.
You know, astronomers today
look through their telescopes.
And they look back out
into the universe, which
is like looking back into time.
And they're astounded.
They're puzzled.
They say based on
our calculations,
the speed at which the universe
is expanding is increasing.
It's getting faster
and faster and faster.
That's not what they're seeing.
What they're seeing is
our own time frame's
slowing down because
our universe is
becoming more massive.
>>NOORY: Pope Francis had his
own views on the Big Bang.
We got to see this.
>>NARRATOR: Pope Francis
has said the Big Bang
theory is compatible with
the Catholic church's
teaching on creation.
Speaking to members of the
Pontifical Academy of Science,
the Pope said it is possible
to believe in both, insisting
God was responsible
for the Big Bang
from which all life evolved.
>>POPE FRANCIS:
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>>NARRATOR: The
Pope's remarks were
in line with the Catholic
church's teaching
over the last few decades.
>>NOORY: What was he
saying in Italian?
>>SCRANTON: I would
have to guess at that.
I have enough Spanish to
be able to guess at it.
But he was, essentially, saying
what the narrator had told us
that the processes of
science are not incompatible
with his understanding
of the processes
according to religion.
But what's interesting for me is
I said that the Dogon, I felt,
had been used as adjunct
professors on Orkney island
during that era of instruction.
There were clerics documented as
being on Orkney the early years
of Orkney who were called
the [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]..
And they have direct connections
to later papal traditions
in Catholicism.
So it seems to me that
it's quite possible
that both traditions come out
of the same original philosophy.
>>NOORY: This pope
more than the others
seems to be more ingrained
in science with religion.
Have you picked that up?
>>SCRANTON: There are a lot of
reasons why I like this pope.
But not just the Pope, but also
people like the Dalai Lama,
are also very integrated
with the perspective
that I'm talking about and
are more or less at liberty
to express that publicly.
The Dalai Lama is in
a much better position
to say, look, I'm looking at
things basically scientifically
and there's a
rationality behind this.
Many people who have looked
at traditions in India
feel that they seem scientific.
The Dogon are the ones who can
express that in modern terms
that we understand.
>>NOORY: Apply this,
Laird, to people watching
be "Beyond Belief" right
now who are saying, OK,
this is difficult to understand,
but I'm learning a little bit
more about this.
How does this affect them?
I mean, if you're before
a class of students
telling them the things we've
been talking about tonight,
and their big concern
is where are they
to going to make
a dollar or what
are they going to do in their
job, how does this affect them?
>>SCRANTON: Well,
certainly anyone
with a spark of
intelligence to them
understands the
value in knowing what
the true relationship is between
humanity and larger processes.
Modern society has
tended to see humanity
as being the ultimate
culmination of all
the processes of progress.
My friend John
Anthony West railed
against the school of progress,
the church of progress.
>>NOORY: God rest his soul.
Right?
>>SCRANTON: Yes.
He would be the
first one to tell you
that what looks like progress to
us hasn't really been progress.
So I think the average listener
or the average student who
wants to think about
subjects deeper
than what was on television
last night necessarily
or what was on the
sports channel last night
understands that there's
value in seeing the bigger
picture here.
Knowing what the
bigger picture here is
gives you the ability to frame
your actions and your choices
in terms of something that's
a constant, not something
that's in motion, not
something that's nebulous.
I think a lot of
people are feeling
a lack of roots, a lack of
rootedness or anchoredness
in the world.
Why should I behave
a certain way?
Why should I make this
choice over that choice?
What's the reason to
look out for a person?
I don't know rather than
take advantage of them,
that sort of thing.
If we want to reverse those
kinds of trends in society,
it can only help to see the big
picture of where we're really--
thousands of years
ago we were really
trying to head in
the first place.
>>NOORY: We seem to have
been more advanced then
than we are today.
That's my impression.
>>SCRANTON: A good example
is written language.
Anyone would tell you
that written language
is an advancement.
But the Dogon don't
see it that way.
In fact, Socrates
didn't see it that way.
I'm currently working
on a book that
opens with a quote from
Socrates where he is--
he minces no words about what a
terrible thing written language
is--
this is a system
of reminders, this
is not a system of knowledge.
This is a system
that allows a person
to represent that they
understand the subject when
they don't really understand it.
That you want to
be learning things
from somebody who has
mastered a subject,
not from somebody who has
read some snippets about it
in some written document.
The Dogon look the same
way, look down their noses
the same way on it.
That it's not just that
they didn't adopt a written
language, that they see written
language as the first step
in the devolution of society.
>>NOORY: Dogon tribe
is still around.
>>SCRANTON: Dogon
tribe is still around.
>>NOORY: What kind
of knowledge do
you think they possess today?
Because they've carried
this through pretty good,
haven't they?
>>SCRANTON: Yes.
The anthropological
studies I'm working from
were wrapped up around 1956.
I imagine the Dogon
priests have done
a very good job of preserving
that knowledge since then.
But the problem is
that they're forbidden
to talk about it to outsiders
until they have confidence
that the outsider really is
sincere and knowledgeable
themselves.
And so, it's a 20
year process to try
to gain the confidence
of a Dogon priest.
>>NOORY: Do they trust us?
>>SCRANTON: They trusted
the French anthropologist.
They ended up initiating
Marcel Griaule
and gave him a Dogon burial
when he died in 1956.
>>NOORY: What's a Dogon burial?
>>SCRANTON: This
is they buried him
as if he were a Dogon citizen,
gave him a Dogon funeral,
and gave him the honors they
would give to a Dogon priest
when they buried him.
>>NOORY: If you had a chance
to meet with these people
right now, this tribe,
what would you ask them?
>>SCRANTON: I would be
looking for confirmation
that I've understood the
tradition in the same way they
do.
I would like to know--
there's a lot of value to
me in different nuances
of opinion about certain
symbols and certain myths.
I'm very interested
in the original myths.
One of the projects I have
thought about taking on
was trying to reformulate
some of those original myths.
I have enough of an
overview of certain topics
to be able to take
a stab at rewriting
the myth of the birth of
Ganesha or things like that.
>>NOORY: What would you
conclude if you did that?
>>SCRANTON: It would
be a way of reframing
some of this
important information
in a way that would
encourage it to survive.
Although, if we really are in
the ascending cycle right now,
the game is different
than it was before.
In the descending cycle,
when we were becoming
more and more
material, the game was
to try to preserve knowledge
that was deteriorating.
On the material side,
the aim is to try
to act on knowledge
that's going to become
more and more obvious to us.
And so part of the
reason why it's OK for me
to talk about things that
were kept secret for thousands
and thousands of
years, is we're now
entering an era
where we're supposed
to be talking about this.
We're not supposed
to be hiding it.
>>NOORY: What kicked
that into high gear?
What created it?
>>SCRANTON: The
natural end of a cycle.
To give you an example of how
the cycle functions, midway
through the cycle, you see
reversals and symbolism
happen across cultures.
Like you've seen matriarchy
turn into patriarchy.
Or you might be aware
that in some cultures,
a circle means one
thing some times
and a square means
another thing.
And then those meanings
reverse themselves
after a period of time.
Well, these reversals
in symbolism
happen across the
board with cultures
all around the world, cultures
that shouldn't have been
in contact with each other.
How could that happen?
My answer to that is
imagine that you're
on a cross-country flight with a
group of people you don't know.
You're a passenger on a plane.
Now, chances are you don't know
anybody else on the flight.
You may talk to one or
two people, but that's it.
And yet, by the time you all
get to the end of the flight,
you all know to change
your watch by three hours.
It's not because anybody
communicated anything
to anybody.
It's because you all
understand the way time works.
>>NOORY: It's given knowledge.
>>SCRANTON: And
this Yuga cycle is
that same kind of a time frame.
There are certain
things that are
going to occur in certain eras.
And everybody knows
it because they
were instructed in the tradition
thousands of years ago.
>>NOORY: Aren't you
baffled, though,
that they knew this
thousands of years ago?
I mean it's amazing
when you think of it.
>>SCRANTON: I would
be except that they
say they got it from somebody
who absolutely understood it.
>>NOORY: Who would
that somebody be?
>>SCRANTON: Well, for the Dogon,
that's a nonmaterial entity
that chose for its own--
for the reasons I was
trying to lay out--
to step across and help us.
>>NOORY: And what do
you think that was?
Consciousness by itself?
>>SCRANTON: The Dogon refer to
them as [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]..
Or, in the Egyptian language,
that's [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH],,
waves perceived.
This is nonmaterial
consciousness
that chose to take
a material form
to act in a material frame.
>>NOORY: So not ETs that
came down and taught them?
>>SCRANTON: There is a
connection for me to ETs.
The ET phenomenon,
very often, plays out
in terms of the same kind
of cross-universality,
cross-dimensionality.
In fact, if you read John
Mack, who was a psychiatrist--
>>NOORY: Sure.
He's passed on, too.
>>SCRANTON: And
Budd Hopkins was--
>>NOORY: He's another one.
>>SCRANTON: In the case
studies that they present,
there are certain effects
that were reported
again and again and
again by people who've
had no contact with each other,
who claimed to have seen UFOs.
Well, these effects
play out in terms
of a kind of
interdimensional translation
that automatically happens.
The way to explain
it to you is if you
shine white light
into a crystal,
you can produce a
rainbow of colors.
That trans-- how can I
say that-- translation
from white light to
multiple colors of light
is an automatic
thing that happens
at the boundary between
these universes.
Well, the same thing
happens with actions
and concepts and words.
And so there's a UFO
encounter where a woman saw
three gray aliens on her porch.
She stepped out onto her
porch and saw these aliens
with their backs to her.
They didn't know she
was there at first.
Suddenly, they noticed
that she's there.
And they turned
to quickly leave.
But instead, of seeing
three gray aliens leave,
she sees three deer leave.
>>NOORY: Was she hallucinating?
>>SCRANTON: I noticed that
the Egyptian word that
means to depart in haste is
also the Egyptian word that
means deer.
These are homonyms.
>>NOORY: Right.
>>SCRANTON: Cosmological
terms play out
in terms of clustered meanings.
A single concept produces a
cluster of related meanings.
But these actions
are the same way.
That when a UFO
rises up, a person
who witnesses it is going to
see it being a particular color.
When it moves away
from them, they're
going to see it being
a particular color.
Say a gray alien
tries to comfort you,
you might very well see that,
interpret that as an owl,
because in Egyptian, one of
the Egyptian cluster words--
>>NOORY: A lot of
people have seen owls.
>>SCRANTON: --for
comforting a person
is the same word as
the word for owl.
It's like a
paranormal-- how can I
say it-- telepathic
translation that's happening.
An action's being
taken, and we're
seeing a mirror
image action that's
a translated version of that.
>>NOORY: Are we
going to really get
the answers that we're seeking?
I mean are you at a point
where you can say you've
learned what you need to learn?
>>SCRANTON: I always think that.
When I finish a book, I always
think I'm at the end of it.
And then something happens--
>>NOORY: Another
new book comes out.
>>SCRANTON: --and I
discover that there's
another level to this stuff.
The Dogon compare it to
skins on on an onion.
You pull a skin
back on an onion.
And there's another one there
waiting to be peeled back.
And you never get to
the bottom of them.
Yes, eventually, we're
going to understand this.
My role is the same as
the role of a crop circle.
My role is to get some tiny
percentage of the people who
hear about my books to
scratch their head and say,
what's going on here?
Maybe I should look into this.
>>NOORY: Now, they would simply
say I didn't know this before.
>>SCRANTON: Right.
They might simply say that.
But just to simply be
conscious of the fact
that there's a blind
spot is a benefit.
>>NOORY: Are there multiverses?
>>SCRANTON: According to
the Dogon and the Buddhists,
there absolutely are.
And they are telling us that,
at least in our locality,
there are 14 universes
that emerge as pairs.
Just as some biologists say
that all pregnancies have
the potential to be
twins originally,
universes form in pairs.
>>NOORY: What would
bother you the most,
Laird, about what you know?
Is there something there
that's puzzling for you?
>>SCRANTON: First
of all, there is
nothing I have stumbled across
that is in any way nefarious.
It's all well intentioned.
>>NOORY: All right.
>>SCRANTON: Best intentioned.
>>NOORY: Unlike what David
Jacobs would be saying.
Right?
>>SCRANTON: Right.
That in my experience-- and
I understand that different
people experience things
in different ways--
from my perspective, there
is nothing to be afraid of.
There is nothing
to be upset about.
There's not even
concepts of good and evil
in the Dogon tradition.
It's framed as truth and error.
You can make an attempt
at understanding something
and not succeed.
And if you haven't
succeeded, all that means
is that you need to try again.
But there's no good and
bad assigned to things.
So there's no concept of
heaven and hell, no sense of--
there's not even a
sense of reincarnation,
except as comes from genetics.
>>NOORY: Is there a god?
>>SCRANTON: No--
>>NOORY: Oooooooh.
No?
>>SCRANTON: According
to the Dogon,
this is a nontheistic system.
And that even the
one character they
have who is framed
as a creator god,
you can tell from
the phonetics, it's
really a scientific concept.
It's not framed.
There is what the
Cabbalists refer to
and the Dogon refer to as
a primordial consciousness,
or a primordial entity.
But they don't deify it.
>>NOORY: Hence you book
"Seeking the Primordial."
>>SCRANTON: Right.
And that they don't deify it.
In Buddhism, when you understand
that that consciousness is
the same consciousness
as yours, you've
arrived at the
peak of ascension.
>>NOORY: Is this something that
we should be concerned about?
>>SCRANTON: No,
I don't think so.
To me, any person
religious or scientific,
understands there are
two possibilities here.
Either things were set
in motion by a deity--
>>NOORY: Or it was not.
>>SCRANTON: Or is wasn't.
But even if it was set
in motion by the deity,
that still leaves
the question of what
set the deity in motion.
Well, you can say, well,
the deity always was.
But I can also say,
well, electromagnetism
and electricity always were.
>>NOORY: Something
started something.
>>SCRANTON: Right.
In Samkhya's view,
a consciousness
is capable of perceiving
itself, that you
don't need to postulate a
deity to take an action.
When a thing achieves
consciousness,
it can take its own action.
>>NOORY: Laird, thanks
for being on the program.
Appreciate it.
>>SCRANTON: Thank you, George,
I appreciate it myself.
>>NOORY: I am
still amazed at how
an ancient tribe like the
Dogons would understand
that there was a binary star
system with their star Sirius.
They knew this.
As you heard Laird Scranton
say Carl Sagan said,
well, maybe they heard
these from other astronomers
or something.
I don't think so.
I think the knowledge that they
got and possess to this day
came from some other source
outside of this world.
I'm George Noory.
And thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]